# Lecture 7 — Codes, Standards, and Corrugated Stainless Steel Tubing

*3.371 Codes and Standards, Summer 2012, session 7 of 7.*
*Source video: `nLWgIwqPozE`.*

---

## §1. Code complexity and the limits of engineering oversight [00:01]

`§1.p1` The increase in our computational capacity has caused an explosion in the manuals, and a need for greater and greater engineering oversight and knowledge. At the same time, more and more companies figure they can just go to market with a product that doesn't have any engineering. I'm going to tell you about a company a little later where they have almost no technical expertise, and how that got them into trouble. There are lots of other engineers who look at things, but when people look at things they're not doing the full thought, they're not going through and explaining everything.

---

## §2. Aluminum in Navy ship design [00:53]

`§2.p1` Let me talk a little bit about design of aluminum, because that's something you should be interested in. In my career I've seen the Navy come full circle on this. Back in the seventies they built ships — anybody been on a ship that the Navy built in the seventies? Surface ship or submarine?

`§2.p2` **Student:** Submarine.

`§2.p3` Well, that doesn't count — they don't have a lot of aluminum superstructures on submarines. Surface ships built in the seventies had aluminum superstructures. Even the aircraft carrier had aluminum superstructures. They're all painted gray, so who knows what they're made of — you can tell from the corrosion, aluminum corrosion is white and steel is rusty colored.

`§2.p4` In the Falkland Islands war, the British cruiser Sheffield got hit with the Exocet missile, started an aluminum fire, and it wiped out the whole ship. Earlier there was the Belknap disaster, where the Kennedy was out on maneuvers and the destroyer Belknap collided with the Kennedy. It didn't do that much damage, except some jet fuel came down on top of the Belknap, caught its aluminum superstructure on fire, and wiped out the Belknap. The joke at the time was that a gallon of jet fuel would wipe out any capital ship in the fleet if they had aluminum superstructures.

`§2.p5` So in the early to mid eighties, David Taylor — this is Annapolis, just across from the Naval Academy. Some of you pointed out that it's just a park now, but they used to have some real work going on there. There are some very nice buildings. I remember Captain Corky Graham — I don't know if he ever made admiral, but he had been a student in 13A, and he rose to the rank of captain. When he became commander of David Taylor, he kicked someone out, because there's a beautiful antebellum-type home on the grounds, and he was single, but he kicked out some other captain because he wanted to live in this nice antebellum home.

`§2.p6` I can remember working there during the summers. There was one building, the welding and inspection group building, and most of the metallurgists worked down in the corrosion group. If you ever study corrosion you'll find a lot of data comes from corrosion in Severn River water. That's where the Severn River water test was done — right there across from the Naval Academy at David Taylor — so a lot of the data is Navy data. There was a big building between the cafeteria where we were and the rest of the facility. If I tried to walk through there I had to be careful. It was okay to walk on the bottom floor, just some old machines and stuff, but if you tried to get to the upper floor, that was a problem, because that's where they did all the sonar research. It was super classified, but it never looked like there was any security. I was told once that an alarm went off in that building, and within two minutes there was a marine behind every tree with a rifle pointed at the building. They just come out of the woodwork. I guess they live in the trees like squirrels.

`§2.p7` In any case, in the early eighties the Navy was trying to do waffle-membrane construction of the superstructures. They've got to be light, so they were using high-strength sheet-metal steel and making something that looked like a cross-section of corrugated cardboard in steel, to replace the lightweight aluminum structures. It's a serious problem for ships in general. Does anyone know what an aircraft carrier gains per year in weight? 250 tons a year. If you plot the Nimitz-class carriers from the early sixties all the way up through 2000 or so, they gained 250 tons a year. And most of it's up top.

`§2.p8` Not due to rust — new equipment that never existed before. New radomes and so on. Even an existing sub will get heavier and heavier with time. It's like a house: haven't you ever lived in a house and had more stuff when you moved than when you started? Carriers are the same way, they keep adding more things. It's a problem for the Army soldier too. Look at what a policeman wears on his belt now — you wonder he can even walk, the belt is just a thing to carry all this other stuff, and there's not much room to carry anything else. Same thing for an Army soldier. They're predicting they'll be carrying packs of 150 pounds, and half of that's going to be batteries for all the electronic gear they have. So things get more and more complex with time.

`§2.p9` So they were trying to get rid of the aluminum so they wouldn't have aluminum fires, and trying to keep the weight down. The next thing I know, by early 2000, after the World Trade Center fires and so on, they basically decided — and peace had broken out with the former Soviet Union and you didn't need a Sea Wolf submarine anymore, you needed littoral craft. I never heard the word "littoral" before; most people hadn't. And so now they're high-speed aluminum craft. But the problem with aluminum is it's a lot more difficult to weld than steel. It doesn't corrode as well. It can catch fire — but the Navy has sort of given up worrying about whether it catches fire. If it catches fire, it does.

---

## §3. Aluminum design, fatigue, and the welding code [07:48]

`§3.p1` If you look at the old aluminum structural welding code, before 2000 it was thicker than the one today, but it had a design section. By 2003 it actually got thinner, because they included the Aluminum Association's aluminum design manual, which has a fair amount of thickness to it. If you look at allowable design stresses for aluminum, you'll find — for all kinds of structures — they have fatigue design details in greater concentration than you'll find in the steel literature. Does anybody know anything about the properties of aluminum that make fatigue a greater problem for aluminum than for steel? No one?

`§3.p2` If you look at stress versus number of cycles for a steel, you get a fatigue curve that comes down and looks like this. High stress and low numbers of cycles, log cycles. Somewhere around a million or 10 million cycles the thing levels off for steel, and has essentially infinite life, which they usually draw as an arrow going out. For aluminum, you'll be considerably weaker, but the curve just keeps going down. People have gone out to 10 to the 8th or 10 to the 9th cycles — it takes a long time to get to 10 to the 9th cycles — but it just keeps decreasing. For steel the fatigue limit is somewhere between 0.45 and 0.5 of the yield stress. For aluminum, there is no fatigue limit. If you fatigue the aluminum long enough, the acceptable stress level will keep going down. This is a big problem for introducing aluminum wheels in trucks.

`§3.p3` They had aluminum wheels in cars back in the sixties and seventies, but it wasn't until the nineties that aluminum wheels in trucks took off, and that was when they got sophisticated enough computers to do a good enough stress design to know exactly what the stress was. They were using supercomputers to design truck wheels out of aluminum. Aluminum has this problem of having no fatigue limit below which the material will not fail in fatigue.

`§3.p4` The aluminum design manual has all kinds of connections, bolted or welded, in different categories A through F if I remember. The E categories are not quite as bad as F, but things where you wrap a weld around and you have lots of residual stresses, you end up getting fatigue cracks fairly easily. There are some famous bridge failures that occurred because of that type of doubler-plate design where they wrapped around. There's one in Australia that was a big surprise about fifty or sixty years ago to the designers of steel. A lot of those details have come exactly out of the steel construction manual in terms of weld-type details, but they apply to aluminum in a lot more complex ways.

`§3.p5` Aluminum doesn't have the strength of steel. It's about one-third the strength of steel. You can get 60, 70 ksi yield aluminum alloys, heat-treated aerospace alloys, but they're not very weldable. Most of the weldable aluminum alloys that can develop full strength in the weld — there's a host of alloys with a number of different filler metals. You can't just use any old filler metal with aluminum. If you use the wrong filler metal with the wrong alloy, it's going to crack, and you can't prevent it. There are some aluminum alloys that just cannot be welded without cracking. A lot of the 2000-series alloys that they rivet aircraft out of — they rivet them because they can't weld them. If you try to do fusion welding on a 2024 aluminum, you just have cracks in the heat-affected zone.

`§3.p6` What they typically use for welding of ships are 5000-series alloys. The problem with those is they've only got 20 or 30 ksi yield strength. That's significantly less than something like an HY-100, which is what you build a submarine out of today, at 100 ksi. So it's one quarter the strength of submarine steel, about half the strength of plate on a surface ship. So aluminum doesn't have the yield strength, it doesn't have the fatigue strength, and you have to be very careful about what filler metal you use.

`§3.p7` You can hear about wonderful aluminum alloys with tremendous strength. Anybody have an idea what the highest-technology aluminum alloys are used for — alloys close to 100 ksi yield?

`§3.p8` **Student:** Baseball bats.

`§3.p9` Baseball bats. They slim them down, and they have special alloys used only for baseball bats. They heat them up and they quench them in ice water in order to maintain fine grain size, and they will get higher strengths than anything used in any aircraft. But they're very thin — about twenty thousandths thick in some spots.

`§3.p10` So it's sometimes interesting to find out where the real technology is. If you look at the market size, it makes sense. Some of the most sophisticated stainless steel goes into razor blades. Why? There are a lot of razor blades out there. There's this complex table that you don't really have to understand right now, but you should know that if you're welding a particular base metal, there are all kinds of weld metals, and you can only choose certain combinations, and it's much more restrictive than steel.

`§3.p11` The structural welding code for steel is actually fairly simple. It basically says the safety factor for a building is 1.67 and for a bridge it's 2.0. But for aluminum, the design stress level becomes a function of the alloy you're using. The strengths you can use — remember I told you 20 to 30 ksi yield strength — the fatigue strengths for allowable shear are significantly less. You can only use about one-third of your yield strength. So you only have one half to one quarter of the yield strength to begin with compared to steel. But instead of being able to use about sixty percent of that, which you can in steel, you can only use one-third. So you're getting down to design stresses, in some cases — well, the 1100 series, like frying pans, is relatively pure aluminum, or aluminum foil — but you're getting down to design stresses in the five-to-eight ksi range, which is not much stress at all. It's not much more than the yield strength of a good plastic. So it might be aluminum, but in terms of fatigue strength long-term, it's really not much better than plastic.

`§3.p12` It's got more toughness than plastic, and it has certain other advantages. It will burn but it's harder to burn. You end up with a very complex manual, much more complex than a steel construction manual, just because the aluminum metallurgy is much more difficult than the steel metallurgy. We've got a proliferation where we've gone from a manual fifteen years ago where everything you needed to know was in one volume, to now a manual of nearly that size plus all of this. You really have to be a fairly sophisticated civil or structural engineer to do it. I used to know how to do it in the 1997 code, but now I go get an expert on aluminum design. It's just a lot messier.

`§3.p13` That's part of the explosion of the codes I've talked about. The codes have gotten much more complex, which means you need more and more specialty. It's the same in most things, whether it's medicine or ship design. At the same time, I'm finding more and more entrepreneurs, small businesses that start up and decide we don't need all this engineering overhead, we can go market our product, and we'll just let our suppliers do our engineering. You end up with new products, some of which are successful, but some of which become a disaster.

---

## §4. Corrugated stainless steel tubing: a new product enters the market [18:36]

`§4.p1` *[Tom holds up a length of corrugated stainless steel tubing.]* What I wanted to talk about is corrugated stainless steel tubing. Anyone ever heard of corrugated stainless steel tubing? This is gas tubing. It's fuel gas, originally in yellow, because that's the international code for fuel gas tubing. A plumber goes in a building, or a firefighter goes into a building, and they see yellow tubing — they know it probably carries a flammable gas, sort of a warning.

`§4.p2` It replaced black iron pipe. In the early eighties the American Gas Association or the Gas Research Institute — I can't remember which, they're both located in Ohio if I remember — decided they wanted to promote more use of gas. You can understand why. They were also concerned that most of the steel piping they'd been putting in in the twenties and thirties and forties and fifties was corroding. They buried the steel pipe in the ground, and particularly in New England — in Arizona it's not so bad because it doesn't rain that often, but in New England it rains a lot, the ground is wet, and this stuff corrodes. It's about an eighth of an inch thick in small diameters, but it takes a while to corrode. The U.S. Army did a study of 25,000 underground storage tanks, and they showed the typical corrosion rate: you'll perforate an eighth of an inch of steel in 5 to 25 years, depending on soil conditions, part of the country, amount of rainfall, pH of the soil, electrical resistivity of the soil because of the corrosion currents that can be carried through. Typical time to perforation of a pipe is 5 to 25 years.

`§4.p3` So how come all through Boston they put in gas piping in the 1930s — I live in a house built during the Depression, and going down our street, gas piping was put in. What did they use before that for gas piping? They used wooden logs that were gun-drilled out, caulked up with some oakum, and then they got to cast iron pipe in the 1880s. But all they used gas for back then was streetlights. It was in the 1920s or so they started using steel piping. The pipe running down my street, water pipe and gas pipe, have been there more than 70 years. Why aren't they full of holes?

`§4.p4` Well, it is full of holes. Science is science. But it's surrounded by mud, and the mud seals it. So it does have a hole in it, big deal — it's just leaking a little water. Some estimates state that 25 percent of the water that a utility pumps is lost through leaks in the system into the ground. So you're watering the trees for free. For water pipe, what's the big deal? For gas pipe, you leak a little gas into the ground — that's where it came from to begin with, right? What's the problem?

`§4.p5` I didn't understand this until the early or mid eighties. Seven o'clock one Sunday morning, my neighbor two doors down calls me up: "Tom, you've got a leak in your front yard." Tony — he's been a machinist for sixty-some years — he woke up early, he likes to wander around, he's a very friendly busybody. I look out, and sure enough I have this little four-inch sprinkler in the middle, between my sidewalk and the driveway and the street. So I call the town water department on a Sunday morning, and about 10 o'clock they have their backhoe out digging up the street to get to the valve to close this off.

`§4.p6` As I'm sitting there watching the backhoe in front of my house, they're digging this pit and getting down there, I start smelling gas. And right then — back then it was Boston Gas — the Boston Gas truck pulls up, 10 o'clock Sunday morning. I look over, and the guy running the backhoe jumps out, takes some chewing gum out of his mouth, jumps in the pit, and plugs a leak in the gas pipe that was next to the water pipe. I said, "How'd you guys know?" They said, "Whenever we uncover any pipe around here, we know we're going to find leaks." They automatically call the gas company whenever they start digging, because there are leaks, folks. That's the infrastructure.

`§4.p7` Fifteen years later, the gas company has to go through these older neighborhoods every three years by state law — another standard — and they put sniffers in the ground to check the amount of natural gas in the ground, because it's leaking, it's saturating the soil. If you have a really bad leak, the plants die. You can often tell — if you have a spot of ground where you can't grow any grass, or you have a shrub that keeps dying, it's because you probably have a gas leak there.

`§4.p8` They come sniffing down the street and at two houses, mine and another one, they find too much gas in the soil. So what do they do? They sleeve the pipe. It's too expensive to dig it up and replace it. And they wouldn't replace it with a new steel pipe anyway, they'd replace it with a plastic pipe. They dig up the street, they run a plastic sleeve pipe through into my house — don't dig up my front yard, and everything's fine. Well, except it's not fine. They have to make a plastic-to-steel connection on the inside.

`§4.p9` A week later we go to listen to one of our children's concerts at the school, and my wife brings the younger ones home early to put them to bed, and she smells gas all throughout the house. I get home half an hour later, there's still gas throughout the house. She called the gas company; it's pouring rain, and they come out, and that little plastic-to-steel connection is leaking gas. It is one of the strongest gas smells I've ever smelled inside a building. I don't know that we were at the explosive limit, but we weren't far from it. I could have blown up my house, and everything would have been fine.

`§4.p10` Except they put in a work order to fix it permanently. The fix — he just came and put some putty on, it's raining out, middle of the night, so he just put some putty on. He said, "I'll put a work order in." He put the work order in, but then Boston Gas lost the work order. My wife called them up after about three weeks, and they said, "We don't have anything," and they started arguing with her about whether we had putty on our connection, telling her she didn't know what she was talking about. So I got involved, and I called up the regulatory authorities — another set of people who set standards. I tell you, I was getting calls here at work every twenty minutes from high-ranking officials at Boston Gas. There were like ten trucks that converged on our house once the state regulators told them to go fix it. They probably got a nasty letter at least from the state for having lost the fact that they had made a temporary connection and not fixed it.

---

## §5. CSST: Japanese origin, ANSI LC1, and market entry [27:11]

`§5.p1` So they had concerns about all this corroding gas piping in the early eighties, and they were looking for solutions. What's the piping they put in now? It's plastic. The plastic won't corrode. The plastic has other problems — it's brittle, it probably won't last an earthquake, but if we have that bad an earthquake a lot of other things won't last either. In Japan they had developed corrugated stainless steel tubing for gas, because they have a lot of earthquakes and they were worried about fires. If I had a longer length of this, you'd find it's very flexible, comes in big coils three or four feet in diameter. Costs about five dollars a foot.

`§5.p2` Between 1987 and 1997, to market this in the U.S., they hire a guy out in Waltham, Massachusetts who works for Foster Wheeler. He writes a standard called ANSI LC1. They incorporate that standard in Canada, because the Canadian authorities to develop a new standard for gas piping have less bureaucracy than the United States. Since they get it approved in Canada, the Canadian standard essentially gets reciprocity as a U.S. standard, and it becomes an ANSI standard. They will now sell it to you — all of about sixty pages long, it'll cost you $600. I just bought a copy for $598. Again, tells you about the price of these things.

`§5.p3` They incorporate the standard on how to install this stuff, because you have to have special fittings. There are about half a dozen manufacturers of it now. By 1997 they start marketing it because they've gotten approval from various state agencies to allow this into the plumbing code. Before that, the code wouldn't allow you to use an innovative material. There's how codes stifle innovation. Here's this wonderful new material that the Japanese have been using, and we couldn't use it until they spent ten years getting enough states to approve it that certain companies would start manufacturing it.

`§5.p4` In fact, we've been using this stuff for fifty years. You can go to Home Depot and look up how to install a gas stove or a gas dryer, and they will sell you links from three feet to six feet long of corrugated connectors, made by two other people, and they've been making them for fifty years, so you can pull your appliance out from the wall. My furnace at home is a gas furnace, and it's hard-piped with black iron pipe. I can't pull it out from the wall. But your stove, you want to be able to get behind your stove to clean all those little rat droppings. Or you want to pull out your dryer to clean all the lint from behind there.

`§5.p5` So we had been using this stuff, but we hadn't been using it in 100 to 200 foot lengths in homes. Why is it such a wonderful product? It's light, it's flexible. Instead of having to thread fifteen or twenty pieces to go from the gas meter to your stove, you have one piece and you can thread it through the walls without cutting down the walls. It's just easy to install. Black iron pipe might cost 70 cents a foot, this stuff is five dollars a foot — it has less value of material in it than black iron pipe, even though it's stainless steel — but they get a tremendous markup. Between '97 and today, fifteen years, there's a billion feet of this stuff out there in American homes.

`§5.p6` Anyone have a relative — most of you are probably too young to have big homes with fireplaces on the second floor in the master bedroom, or a gas fireplace in the den — do your parents have homes like that? Yeah, okay. And they'll have gas piped out to your barbecue grill in some places, rather than using a propane tank. Getting some nods. Why? This is the miracle product that makes it possible. We used to have maybe fifty feet of black iron pipe in a home, we now might have 200 feet of this stuff, and we have gas appliances all over the place. Fireplaces in the den and the master bedroom, barbecue grills — everything's becoming gas. So it served the function the Gas Association wanted, to promote the use of gas.

---

## §6. Lightning: the unconsidered failure mode [32:37]

`§6.p1` They started selling in 1997. By 1998 they started noticing they had a few more fires than they were used to that were not explained. This is an innovative product, but no one ever thought about what would be the effect of lightning on this product. The effect of lightning is that if lightning hits, it will blow a hole in it. *[Tom indicates perforated samples.]* Now, this wasn't done by lightning, this was done by an electrical circuit — the smaller holes by a 20-amp circuit, the bigger holes by a 40-amp circuit. You get an arc to this stuff, and a tenth of a coulomb — they characterize the strength of a lightning strike in coulombs. An ampere is a coulomb per second, so a coulomb is about 6 times 10 to the 19th electrons. A typical lightning strike is three to five coulombs of charge.

`§6.p2` They can go up to 400 coulombs in a really big strike, but that's pretty rare. They easily can go up to 80 coulombs in a big strike. This stuff can sustain a tenth of a coulomb without perforation. So what do you think the odds are of getting a hole in this if you get hit by lightning in your house? Pretty good.

`§6.p3` The industry acknowledges that by 2001 they knew about this, because they started doing research at the old General Electric Lightning Research Center in Pittsfield, Massachusetts. They used to build electrical distribution transformers for General Electric, and they had to deal with simulated lightning strikes, because it can get really exciting if lightning hits a distribution transformer and all the power goes out. So they have to protect these things from lightning — and I gave you the Ben Franklin article about lightning protection systems. They certainly learned by 2001; there's some evidence they started learning within the first couple of years. If you look at the National Fire Protection Association data, you see in 1998 a big jump in the number of fires due to lightning from fuel gas in homes.

`§6.p4` There are somewhere between half a million and a million of the 65 million homes in the United States that have this product in them. If it's in your home or a relative's home, get a lightning protection system. It'll only cost you four or five thousand dollars, and think of all the money you saved on the installation of your gas piping. So you can take the money you saved and now protect your home that won't burn down in case the lightning storm comes by.

`§6.p5` They realized they had a problem by 2003. A number of patents came out by different people; they decided they could improve things by making a conductive jacket. They basically added carbon black to the plastic, and now it looks like an automobile tire with carbon black in it. One of the products made by Gastite actually has two layers of plastic with a layer of perforated aluminum in between, and the Gastite product will sustain a lightning strike of 80 coulombs — 800 times safer because of that second layer of aluminum. There's another product made by a competitor with just the conductive plastic, and it will sustain about six coulombs.

`§6.p6` Six coulombs — if this is your median, and there are six coulombs — I'm not sure I'd want that in my house. I think I'd rather have this in my house. But if I really want to be safe I would have black iron pipe, because to my knowledge no one has ever heard of black iron pipe being perforated by lightning. Theoretically it's possible, but no one has heard of it.

`§6.p7` Why? You can go through the heat transfer. In the welding section I'll talk about the distance that heat travels in time being proportional to the square root of the thermal diffusivity times time, where α is thermal diffusivity. The thermal diffusivity of steel is a tenth of a centimeter squared per second. If we're talking about a circuit breaker, how fast will a circuit breaker close? 1/100th of a second, half of a 60-cycle. So it's 10 to the minus 2 seconds. I have the square root of 10 to the minus 3, which is 0.03. x equals 0.03 centimeters, which is 0.3 millimeters, about twelve thousandths of an inch.

`§6.p8` The CSST is ten thousandths of an inch, so it will blow through CSST in the typical time you might have, but it won't blow through black iron pipe, which is an eighth of an inch, ten times thicker. I simplified some of the heat flow — I didn't solve the time-dependent partial differential equation, and the real solution is about 0.3, not 0.12 inches. It just so happens, the guy at University of Florida caught some triggered lightning — you stick an antenna up in the air in a lightning storm and try to attract a real lightning bolt — and he got a seven-coulomb strike, hit a piece of stainless steel. He was doing this for the Department of Energy for the nuclear waste isolation materials in Nevada. They wanted to make sure that one of these three-inch-thick stainless steel casks wouldn't be perforated by a piece of lightning. They probably spent ten million dollars proving this when a simple calculation would tell you there's no way you could do it. They have to prove it to everyone, because no one trusts them.

`§6.p9` The simple heat flow says you'll perforate this stuff. It's just too thin if it gets hit by any kind of reasonable lightning strike. Black iron pipe is thick enough that it won't be. There are actually codes for the thickness of lightning terminals and lightning rods, and they tell you a lightning rod should have about the cross-sectional area of a piece of black iron pipe. The CSST in stainless steel is five times too thin in cross-section to carry the current to ground.

---

## §7. Blame, grounding, and the impedance argument [40:43]

`§7.p1` So what happened? They started out with this code in the nineties. They got it approved by different state agencies — to install gas piping has the force of law, I'm trying to tie this back to codes and standards. They find out about this problem, and in the meantime they don't really tell anybody. Some people know, but they're sort of trying to hide it. Why are they trying to hide it? You can't hide it completely, because when people's homes start burning down they get upset, insurance companies come in, and they get concerned when they start seeing these holes and people seeing three-foot jets of fire shooting out of their gas piping burning down their house.

`§7.p2` So they start having lawsuits, and what do they blame it on? The plumber who installed it. Blame it on someone else. Not the fact that you engineered it wrong, or didn't even consider lightning to begin with — which they've admitted: "we tested for earthquake resistance, we tested for these other things, no, we didn't think about lightning." Well, that's the problem with a new product, you can't think of every new thing. But when you get slapped in the face with it, you don't try to deep-six it.

`§7.p3` Up through about 2007 they were laying this off on the plumbers, saying you didn't ground it. To give you some idea of the grounding — let's say I have a fireplace, and here are my logs, and I have my nice flame in here, and this is a gas fireplace, and I've got my tubing coming out here. Let's say I also have some electricity coming in, and it's grounded, because they have a little electrical igniter so you hit a button to turn on your fireplace. So it's got electricity in here, it's got gas in here, and you might ground it to this. Of course this is electrically connected to that. But no — they told you to ground it to *their* ground, and their ground means you have to ground it to one of their fittings. And they'll sell you these fittings.

`§7.p4` Remember, there's a billion feet, and they're selling it on average of five dollars a foot over fifteen years, so this is a five-billion-dollar business plus the fittings. It's a fairly substantial business, and they don't want to lose it. Some of these guys — one of them graduated from high school, another has two years of auto mechanic school, and he's the top engineering authority in this company. He has more technical education than the whole rest of the company combined, because he had two years of auto mechanic school. They're designing gas piping for the country. They're making a million dollars a year with their high school diplomas, by selling this stuff, because it saves plumbers — a plumber can plumb a house in one day with this piping where it would take three days if he had to thread black iron pipe and screw it together. Tremendous savings in installation costs.

`§7.p5` They say if you don't ground it electrically here, as opposed to over here, it's no good — you didn't follow their standard. Do you think the electrons care how they get to ground? No, the electrons don't care. But they would blame it on the plumbers, and the plumbers' insurance companies would pay off, pay off, pay off.

`§7.p6` But then, if you start thinking about this grounding — this is not DC electricity. How many electrical engineers do we have? *[A student raises a hand.]* So what's the difference between resistance and impedance?

`§7.p7` **Student:** Resistance is what we talk about in DC.

`§7.p8` Resistance is the resistance of the material to electrical flow in DC. And impedance is the resistance to electrical flow when we have higher-frequency components.

`§7.p9` The whole area of complex numbers is used to define AC electricity. Have you done complex numbers this summer? Not yet. I bet you get to. You get to go through complex numbers. There's what they call in complex numbers the real component and the imaginary component — the imaginary component is the storage of those fields. I mentioned to you before that if I have current going through a conductor, there's a magnetic field around that conductor due to the flow of the current. That's one of Maxwell's equations: if I have a current I will have a magnetic field around it.

`§7.p10` So it turns out that if I have two conductors side by side, and one of them has current going through it, there is what we call the inductance. The inductance is this storage of magnetic field as I try to increase the current from zero to some higher value. I have to create the storage of this magnetic field. At lightning frequencies, where I have rise times of 40,000 amperes per microsecond — that's 40 billion amperes per second. That's the rise time of a lightning strike, fairly fast.

`§7.p11` The typical inductance of any conductor is about one microhenry. So if I take forty thousand times one microhenry — and the AC impedance, simplified, is the inductance L times di/dt, the change in current with time, with L on the order of one microhenry and di/dt forty thousand per microsecond, the microhenrys and microseconds cancel, so you get 40,000 volts. If I have two conductors in a house parallel to each other, and lightning hits and gets into one but not the other, within one hundred thousandths of a second I will have 40,000 volts between those two conductors. And what happens then? It takes 20 to 30,000 to perforate the plastic, so you get an arc between these things, boom, you've got a hole, you're off to the races, you've got a fire in your house.

---

## §8. The Arkansas class action, codes, and the slow correction [48:48]

`§8.p1` They came up with a better product. So what do they do at that point? What should you do at that point to protect the public, when you know you have a product good for a tenth of a coulomb, you know that lightning strikes can be three to five coulombs, and you've got a better product that can take however many coulombs? Do you keep selling the old stuff? You might even want to recall it. Or at least warn people that it's in their house, so they could install a lightning protection system that costs three to five thousand dollars.

`§8.p2` Do you think people would be happy? Probably not. In fact, in 2003 there was a class action in Arkansas. The class action got settled — I don't even know what happened beyond that. One county in Texas has outlawed the use of this stuff, so it's no longer legal in that county. Most other places haven't. Until September 1st of 2011, they kept selling this because it was eight percent cheaper than their version. They were trying to get a markup for the safe product while still selling the unsafe product. That's really responsible.

`§8.p3` Their argument is they met all the codes that applied — which was ANSI LC1, which just happened to be written by them, and ignored lightning altogether. Is ANSI LC1 the only code that would apply to this? I showed you other codes that will call out twenty different codes. ANSI LC1 probably calls out some other codes, but it didn't even consider lightning or AC effects of electricity.

`§8.p4` They learned that, oh, we made a mistake, we should have considered those things. They developed a new product — the black stuff there may be safe. The stuff that replaced this, different manufacturer, I'm not sure it's safe, but even still. They tried to get an eight percent profit off the better product while still selling this stuff. They still sell this stuff outside of North America, because other people don't know about this problem yet around the rest of the world.

`§8.p5` Their argument is that Japan doesn't have as many lightning storms as other places. If you look at lightning frequency tables, California has 1/50th the lightning strikes of Florida. Florida has the most lightning strikes of anywhere in the United States. The Midwest has lots of big lightning storms — tornadoes and all this other stuff. We have a fair amount of lightning; we're supposed to get lightning tonight. So go check out your gas piping in your house. But California and Japan, the lightning has a lower frequency.

`§8.p6` You have to now start looking at the building codes. I put in a gas generator in my house three or four years ago, had the plumbers come in, and they put in about an eight-foot length of this stuff. It's in my basement. Have I replaced it? No. Because I have trees that are twice the size of my house within a few feet of my house. I live in a valley. I don't live up on top of Belmont Hill with the rich folks, I live in the valley. It's down in my basement, right beneath the power line coming in, which is grounded, essentially a lightning protection system for it. So I look at all those things and say the chances of my particular installation getting a perforated hole — plus I calculated, these things are safe if the length is less than ten feet, which explains why all those other connections we've been using for fifty years are safe.

`§8.p7` It's the 100-foot lengths that are the problem. There's a length that goes into this L di/dt. I didn't give you the whole formula, but the longer the length of piping, the greater the voltage you're going to set up. So this is 40,000 volts — actually 40,000 volts per meter. If I have too many meters of piping, I've got real problems. I can show you a book on lightning that claims you can develop two and a half million volts, not just forty thousand. Same calculation, a little more sophisticated; they use two microhenrys rather than one. You can come up with some pretty huge numbers for the voltages that are going to start the arc that starts the hole.

`§8.p8` There are other codes than the ANSI LC1. One of their defenses is, we met all the applicable standards, which is ANSI LC1, which we happen to write, which ignored lightning, but we met it, and therefore we must be safe. It seems like circular reasoning to me. But it's not the only code. If you're using propane, there's NFPA 58, the propane gas code. If you're using natural gas in a house, there's NFPA 54, the National Fuel Gas Code. It's also an ANSI standard, and both of those codes are written into the laws in most states.

`§8.p9` The plumbing authority in Massachusetts is the State Plumbing Board — gas fitters and plumbers. They've adopted NFPA 54 and NFPA 58 as part of the law. A plumber must install gas piping according to the code. We can use Massachusetts as an example because I was involved in part of it.

`§8.p10` In 2003, the company that made this stuff — before they had this stuff, but they had something that looked just like this with a different name on it — came to the State Plumbing Board and said we want authority to start installing this in Massachusetts. This was 2003, when they already knew about the problems with lightning. They didn't tell the plumbing board about the potential problems with lightning at the time. And frankly I wasn't asked to evaluate lightning at the time — I was asked to evaluate the problem because some of the plumbers said: what if you put this in the wall and someone comes along and drives a nail in the wall and perforates it? Now you have a leak that generates a collection of gas in the wall, and if it reaches an explosive mixture you can blow up the house. That doesn't seem like a safe product. The good old black iron pipe, an eighth of an inch thick steel, not many people are going to drive a nail through that. That's going to be deflected when it hits. But this stuff, you hit it with a nail and bang, it just goes right through, and it's happened.

`§8.p11` They said, oh, we have a solution to that, because they did think about that problem. They had hardened steel plates: wherever you have the stuff going along the floor and turning up into the wall, you put one of these nail plates in right at the seal, the floorboards. So if someone's nailing in the wood stripping at the floor of the wall — what do you call that strip molding, the molding? — if they're putting in the floor molding and they hit the gas pipe, we have a nail plate in front of it. I thought, well what if you're hanging a picture? Their answer there is, well, it's just in the area and it can flop in the breeze, so hopefully the nail will just push it aside. Well, we can all hope. Hope springs eternal.

`§8.p12` I ended up writing a letter or an email to the State Plumbing Board, because I'm friends with the chairman of the State Plumbing Board, and he asked me to look at the problem. I looked at their solution of the nail plates, and I said, well, the only way to make it safe is to put a nail plate around the whole thing, which means the only way to make it safe is if you take this flexible tubing and encase it in black iron pipe. Because that's putting a nail plate all the way around it. I wrote that as my letter to the State Plumbing Board.

`§8.p13` I learned just a year ago — from this chairman of the State Plumbing Board — that the attorneys for the people who made this, trying to get approval, had come to the State Plumbing Board and threatened to sue them for restraint of trade if they didn't approve their product. The State Plumbing Board, armed with my letter — this was back in 2003 and I didn't know this at the time — said, well, you either accept our restrictions on how you install this stuff, or else we're going to publicly release Professor Eagar's letter to the public. They accepted all the restrictions of the state of Massachusetts. As a result, Massachusetts has some of the most restrictive requirements for installation of this stuff anywhere in the country.

`§8.p14` So this is the little extortion that goes on between the company and the State Plumbing Board. There are national codes like NFPA 54 and 58. The NFPA 54 committee has basically said they are not responsible for that part of the code. There are other NFPA codes that apply, but the code committee, NFPA, had given approval. By 2007 or 2008 there were enough questions that they went back to the companies and said, well, we gave you a ten-year approval which expires in 2014. You have to prove to us by 2014 that your product is safe.

`§8.p15` They were going to get sued, just like the companies had threatened to sue the State Plumbing Board if they didn't approve the product. Here, the NFPA had approved the product for ten years, with a potential renewal in 2014. I have a copy of the letter from the NFPA committee in 2007 or 2008 saying we require you to prove that the product is safe or you will not get reapproved in 2014. They don't want to get sued for restraint of trade, but they can decide whether they're going to renew it in 2014. That's where that is.

`§8.p16` The companies went to trial once, they lost. The product was found defective. They're on appeal. They removed the yellow stuff from the North American market and are only selling the improved stuff. This is another side to this whole codes and standards story. Here was an innovative product that had significant advantages in cost savings, but soon after it was introduced they learned it had certain problems.

---

## §9. The cost of having no engineering, and lessons [62:01]

`§9.p1` Here you have the tension where the company wants to continue to make profit — comparing a million-dollar salary with two years of auto mechanic school, there's no comparison. So they want to keep it going. They maintained it was safe in the very beginning, and it was just because the plumbers forgot to ground it. But then we had homes where it was clearly grounded and they still had the problem.

`§9.p2` I pointed out that single-point grounding — one point in your house — is not good enough. The lightning, in the time of the lightning flash, can only see a distance of about ten feet in any direction. You'd have to ground it every ten feet. But even by their own code, you can't ground it by clamping to this, you have to ground it at one of the fittings, and there could be fifty feet between fittings. So how do you ground it every ten feet? You can't.

`§9.p3` In the last year, their lightning expert basically said you should have a lightning protection system. This is what Ben Franklin said in 1752. You should have a lightning protection system. But the codes don't require one. A lightning protection system for your home will cost three to five thousand dollars. Not everybody wants one or needs one. Where I live, the trees are going to get hit before I get hit, or the people living on the top of the hill are going to get hit before I get hit.

`§9.p4` In the early days of looking at these things, I used to wonder, how come it's these great big homes on tops of mountains — well, I knew why, tops of mountains — but these were brand new homes, because it's a brand new product. They tended to be places with no trees. Out in the Midwest, the plains, there's not a lot of trees. New development doesn't have big trees. Older developments are not necessarily so bad. There's a big fight going on, and it's going to be a huge fight over all of this stuff.

`§9.p5` The regulatory authorities know what's going on now — that it has to be multiple-point bonded. Part of it is people didn't think about the physics of a lightning strike. They didn't consider lightning. And the companies took three years to get beyond high school electricity. Until six months ago they were still using the word "resistance" when they talked about the electricity. It's only in the last three months they've added the word "impedance" to their vocabulary. That's because I've been telling them what impedance is for three years, so they finally learned. There's no engineering capability within these firms.

`§9.p6` I could tell them — but would you like to have to take every course at MIT to find out what you're doing? That's why you go to somebody — if you need to know electrical engineering, you go to an electrical engineer. Auto mechanics don't cut it.

`§9.p7` So, any questions? This is a real-life story of how a new product came to market, why it came to market, that they didn't have codes, no one thought about a particular failure mode, they found out about the failure mode, but at that point some people had too much vested interest. Now they're fighting, and the regulatory authorities are fighting. Within five or ten years it'll all get sorted out, and they probably will only be selling this type of stuff, and this stuff is probably safe, so we'll have an innovative product. We will probably be selling less of this ten years from now. But it takes time. It's going to take twenty, thirty years for this to work its way through the system. I'm sure there are 10,000 other stories like this. This just happens to be one I've been involved in for the last eight years.